Hey guys, good evening and welcome to the Ironman Chattanooga Course Info Tips and Tricks and Q&A. We're a little bit over a week from this year's Ironman Chattanooga, super excited. Ironman Chattanooga really is a unique race. It is a special race and you guys are really in for a treat. I think it probably is one of the most underrated, underappreciated events on the Ironman circuit. There's some characteristics to it that are really unique, some things that make it kind of first time or friendly, but others that make it actually a pretty challenging race. So what I want to do here this evening is share some of my experience both as an athlete and a coach to help increase your confidence and reduce your stress as you head into race day so that you can have your best race experience possible, produce your fastest time.
your best time, um, and really enjoy everything, uh, that the Chattanooga has to, to offer. So let's get started. My name is John Mayfield. I am a full-time triathlon coach. I am passionate about long course racing. I work exclusively with long course athletes. I am certified by both, uh, USA triathlon at level two and Ironman U. And I've had the privilege of coaching hundreds of athletes from first timers to professionals and everyone in between. So again, what I want to do here this evening is just share, um, everything I've learned over the years, racing myself, working with, uh, again, hundreds of athletes, uh, just to gleam some little information to give you some tips and tricks to help you, um, navigate, uh, those last several days as you head into the race, uh, as well as the race course itself. So a couple of tips before the race, keep in mind, you have to check in by Friday. Um, this, I would.
this goes without saying, but actually every time I do these webinars I find someone who may be traveling in Saturday morning or something like that or Friday evening and they would have missed that check-in. This is one of those things that Ironman is pretty strict about. There is no check-in the day before the race. That's for dropping your bike and dropping your gear bags. No check-in the day before the race. No check-in the day of the race. So make sure that you have arrived in Chattanooga and able to check in by Friday at I believe it's five six o'clock that check-in is open until so make sure that your travel and all that gets you there in time. It's about a two-hour drive both from Nashville and Atlanta depending on if you're if you're flying in and flying into one of those airports. Keep that in mind as as well. So those are the kind of things that you just want to make sure that you're not applying more stress.
to this situation, it's going to be stressful enough, especially if you're traveling, you're flying, you're flying with your bike, there's a lot of things going on. Do everything that you can to reduce your stress, give yourself extra time so you're not having to rush around. You'll be glad that you did. Now, this is the first time I'm gonna mention hydration throughout the evening here, but I can promise you and assure you it won't be the last. In fact, by the time we get to the very end, you may be tired of me talking about hydration. This is one of those things that over the last several years, I have really come to understand just how critical hydration levels are in performance. And yeah, I mean, that's certainly not anything new to anyone. No one is shocked that hydration is important, but what I have found is by far, most athletes are under hydrating and it is having a big impact on their performance. So more on that too, to come, but it's critical.
for race day performance hydration that you start the race in a well hydrated state. And that is again, maybe goes without saying, but be cognizant of that. So my advice here is in these last couple of days, as race day approaches, always have a water bottle in hand, preferably with some electrolytes in there as well, because we're taking in just tons and tons of water alone. We're going to flush out electrolytes. And that is another component to this that is absolutely critical is that we have good electrolyte levels, uh, starting the race and then throughout the race, um, as well, more on that to come as well, spoiler alert. Um, so, uh, I'll talk a little bit more about this, uh, as well coming up. Um, but, but what I do when, when I'm racing a long course race is I like vitamin water. Um, so I just have a case of vitamin water and, um, always have a bottle somewhere, uh, in the vicinity of, of wearing them in those last couple of days, making sure, um, that I'm again, staying well hydrated, keeping up with my electrolytes and, uh, we're going to revisit that. Um,
vitamin water bottle here in a couple of minutes as well. Limit time on your feet. So you've obviously got a whole lot of work to do on race day. You're going to be on your feet a lot, using your legs, tiring your legs. So what we don't want to do is fatigue your legs and your feet and your body and all that in the days leading into the race. So there are several things that you have to do. You have to take care of, you have to go down to the village and check in. You obviously have to have the obligatory walking around in the Ironman store to collect your race day gear, all of that. Day before the race, you have to drop your bike and your gear bag. So there's going to be some time on your feet. There's going to be some time out in the elements. Chances are, it's going to be pretty warm, which again, that's going to go towards that hydration point. So basically we want to just be cognizant of time spent on our feet. There's a lot of really cool stuff in that downtown area. The aquarium is right there.
But I wouldn't say go before the race and spend like three hours walking around the aquarium. Maybe save that for your quote-unquote active recovery day after the race. But whatever time you do spend on your feet, make sure that you are pairing that with recovery. So all those modalities that you've been using to date, hopefully you've been using, things like your foam roller, compression boots, massage, all those kinds of things, stick with that and just offset any time on your feet with some recovery so that you arrive at the start line fresh. Check out the course. I would definitely say there are some unique aspects to this course that you don't want to get caught off guard on a race day. So you have some last-minute sessions to get in. This is a good opportunity to go and experience a portion of that.
My advice here, obviously there's a really cool trail that goes from the swim exit all the way to the swim start. It's a 2.4 mile walk. I just had mentioned limit time on your feet. So maybe not walk the whole thing cause I'd be close to five miles round trip, but you can definitely see the river. You go up on those bridges and you can pretty much see the whole swim course from the pedestrian bridge, which is also part of the run course. So get a feel for it. If you wanna get in a practice swim, which I would advise, there is a public swim area that actually is partitioned off and is a little bit safer up north of the dam. So it's just a couple of miles from the transition area, downtown Chattanooga, go up there to the dam and there's a area designated for swimming. So that'll keep you out of the busier traffic area.
of the actual swim course, but allow you to get in and experience the water temperature and get a feel just for the conditions of it. From there, definitely go check out the bike course. Good thing is it's a, what I refer to as a lollipop course, even though this looks like, I don't know, maybe more like a popsicle or a knife blade or something like that. Good news is you don't actually have to drive 112 miles, or in this case, 114 miles, to see the entire bike course. But there are definitely some areas that you're gonna wanna see. So we're gonna talk about the bike course and everything that it has. There's not a whole lot to it, but there are a few technical areas that you do not want to experience or see for the first time on race day. So go out, drive the course, see exactly what I'm referring to. The biggest thing is going to be the southern tip U-turn, where you're basically gonna be heading downhill pretty quick, and then make a sharp...
Almost complete you turn immediately up to a pretty good climb You're gonna want to see that and have a game plan for it, but you'll also be able to see things like You know, I'm gonna refer to the course as hilly as rolling. But what does that mean? I'm come from the the Texas Gulf Coast where you know, a little a speed bump is a is a rolling hill So it means a little bit something different to to everyone For some a Quote unquote hill maybe a mountain others again just something like a little speed bump or something So go out there and see exactly what the course looks like exactly what you're going to experience on race day So you're not caught off guard The aid stations will also be marked in brightly colored duct tape on the roads. You'll get a feel for exactly Where those are how they're spaced out, but also things like is is the aid station on a climb? Is it just before or just after a sharp turn? Yeah, Ironman will do that for whatever reason But go see exactly where those are have
a game plan just so that there are no surprises on race day. And then same thing for the bike course. Um, maybe you, you ride the bike course on your bike, get in a little session, make sure your brakes aren't rubbing, make sure your gears are shifting well, um, and preview the, the, the run course. So, uh, there are definitely some, some challenging sections of that run course that, uh, you're going to want to have a game plan for and be prepared for so that you're not caught off guard, not surprised on race day. So go and check out, uh, the course, uh, read the athlete guide, even for seasoned athletes. There's usually one or two little nuggets in there, um, that, uh, are very important and maybe go without saying. Um, but, uh, if, if not new information, they may be a good reminder. So make sure you're checking out, um, the athlete guide and then, um, also check out the opening ceremony is Friday, six o'clock. Um, some cool stuff, some great inspirational videos that, uh, will really get you excited for the, for the, for the weekend. Um, and a great opportunity just to.
connect with the community there. All right, on to the swim course. Known as one of the fastest Ironman swims on the circuits and perhaps one of the reasons you even chose this race. So, as we head down to the swim start, the water temperature will be announced on race morning in transition. Typically, it will be posted in the days prior, leading into the race. Oftentimes when you go to check in, they will have the water temperature for that day, but the official water temperature will be taking early morning on race day. So, it's been close to wetsuit legal. That's kind of that big lingering question that a lot of folks are going to have. Is this going to be wetsuit legal or not? So, last year, the official water temperature was 75.6. The year before that, 74.8. So, for the past two years, it has been wetsuit legal. It is wetsuit.
legal up to and including 76.1 degrees. At 76.2, it becomes wetsuit optional. So over the last several couple of years, two years, it has been wetsuit legal. But prior to 2021, there was no race in 2020, obviously. But prior to that, there were several years where the water temperature was above 76.1. It was not a wetsuit legal race. This has been a warm year. And from what I've seen, we're already lingering around the mid to upper 70s. So my advice here is just to be prepared both ways. There have been days where or years where the day before the race, it may be two or three degrees above 77, 78 degrees, then all of a sudden on a race morning, you know, it may be 75.9. So you never really know. Be prepared for either. I would say gun to my head if I had to
I would say this year it will probably be not a wetsuit legal race, so Plan for that and if you are one that hopes for a wetsuit legal race, then then maybe You'll get lucky and and they'll find a nice cool spot there in the river and it'll be wetsuit legal But I would say for this year It's not definite. I'm not making a prediction But I would say the prudent thing to do would be prepared for a non non wetsuit legal swim If in that case, it's not quote-unquote wetsuit legal you still will have the option to wear a wetsuit But you will be starting behind all those that do not Wear a wetsuit and you will not be eligible for age group awards or world championship slot still official finisher all of that Just not eligible for the awards So as I mentioned, it's a 2.4 mile walk From the transition area down there to the swim start. There is no parking down there at the swim start, but they do a
great job of shuttling all of the athletes down there via bus. So, um, it starts quite early, starts at four 30 in the morning. They start running buses from the transition area down to the swim start. There are a lot of buses, um, and they are quite efficient, not a real long drive, pretty long walk, but it's a short drive. So, uh, once that bus leaves the, uh, transition area, um, you're down to the swim start in, in five to 10 minutes. So, um, what you'll do is get everything taken care of in the morning, down in your transition area, do what you need to do down there, hop on a bus, and they will take you, uh, down there to the swim start, uh, those buses run again, from four 30 until seven with the age grouper starting the race at seven 30. It is a self-seated rolling start. So you will be lining up according to your expected swim time. Um, obviously, um, the, the big wrench that can be thrown in here is, is the current, um, so what you will do is line up.
according to what you would expect your swim time to be if there were no current. So we're not gonna take the current into consideration here. Basically what we're trying to do is get everyone swimming with like pace swimmers. So that's the intent so far as that goes. So what would your normal unassisted 2.4 mile swim time be line up according to that. As you can see here from the picture, nice, easy swim start. You'll walk down the ramp onto that platform, jump in and take off towards the swim exit. So a couple of tips for the swim start. My recommendation is to get on an early bus and get queued up early. You'll head down to, it's a park area along that Tennessee River Trail where you'll get queued up. But there is a bit of a wait. So there are bathrooms down there at the swim start. They do get quite busy.
you can imagine, get down there early, get down there to take care of that, kind of get your spot set up. For me, I don't want to be rushing. I don't want to be late. I don't want any of that worry on my mind on race morning. So I do everything early. Race day is about the only time I do stuff early, but on race day, I definitely want to do away and manage as much of that stress and worries I can. So I'm going to be, maybe not the first person down there, but I will get down there early just so that, you know, if anything pops up, I've got plenty of time just to relax and take it easy, not stressing. Consider hydration and nutrition. So this is perhaps a little bit different in that it's not your typical triathlon where you're right there in transition area. You go from showing up, you set up transition, and then within a few minutes, you head down to the race start and boom, you're off. There is going to be a bit of a time between when you're leaving that transition area and actually.
Uh, not only starting the swim, but, but finishing the swim as, as well. So, uh, you're going to be in line for the bus, riding the bus, getting down there to the park, getting all set up. I mentioned that that is quick. It is. Um, but keep in mind, as, as we talked about your hydration and your nutrition is critical. So maybe plan on taking, um, just a bottle, uh, with, with water, with electrolytes, with calories down there that just kind of nursing as you're waiting, uh, for, for the swim start to happen, just so that again, you're 100% topped off, ready to go. Uh, when, when that, um, race begins for you, don't queue slower than expected. So, um, as mentioned, you're going to line up according to your expected non-assisted swim time. Um, oh, something I've seen, something I've done, uh, even is, is queue slower so that I can be with, uh, either one of the athletes that I coach or one of my training partners, something like that, um, and it's, it's not as conducive to a good, clean, fast swim. Um, there are.
advantages to swimming with athletes that are of like pace. There's going to be less contact, less people swimming over you, less people to swim over. So hang out in the morning, do what you need to do. But once it comes time to queue, queue according to your actual expected swim time. Now, a great thing about this swim venue is there's a lot of room to spread out. So even if you do get into a bunch, there's always somewhere that you can go. Consider the water and air temperature for your wetsuits. So oftentimes athletes will think about what they're going to wear in the swim in a vacuum. It's just specific to the water temperature and nothing else. But there are other things to consider as well. So along with my rants here this evening about hydration, nutrition, we're also going to be talking about cooling, maintaining
a low core temperature. Just like with hydration, once we begin to approach a dehydration state, our performance is going to decline. Same thing, as core temperature increases, performance is going to be limited. So Chattanooga is known for being a warm to hot race. And as you are out there exercising and creating body heat in a warm environment for lots and lots of hours, by the time you reach the run course, you may be eight, nine hours in of exercise. That's a lot of accumulated heat that your body has put off. So the longer you can hold off on that and better manage that the better off you're going to be. So this is just a consideration is if it is, say it's 76 degrees. So wetsuit legal swim, but that's really warm. And then the day is going to be warm. The morning is going to be humid. So you're going to hop on that bike.
and start generating more body heat once you start pedaling out there in a warm environment. Keep that in mind that you may be better off not wearing a wetsuit and being a little bit cooler as you exit the swim as opposed to wearing that wetsuit but coming out hotter. So your hydration is affected, your core temperature is affected. So just be cognizant of that. Just know that what you wear on the swim is not in a vacuum. It can have an impact on things further down the road. And yeah, it's a bit of a stretch to say what you wear on the swim of an Ironman can affect the run. But there is there is accumulation effect. It's an all day accumulation of body heat. And if you're right on that borderline and little things matter, which they do, that that can be that can be affected. I'm not saying don't wear a wetsuit, especially if it's below that 76%.
You know, you may swim five minutes faster in your wetsuit and it may be well worth it, but you know Just something to consider take that Keep that in mind and just make a decision. Whatever is right for you All right, so the actual swim course Is is a point to point so basically you'll jump off that platform into the river and Head head to the swim exit not a whole lot to it No turns other than that final little turn there at the at the swim exit as mentioned the current Will fluctuate so it's it's all controlled By the dam that is that is not too far up upstream. So There have been years where there is effectively no assistance Others had has been quite fast. So it really all just depends on how much water is being let out of the dam And that can vary from from day to day
So we can get an idea of a water temperature of flow rate all those kinds of things as as the the race approaches but inevitably it comes down to race day as to exactly how how much The the current is going to be assisting but worst case scenario. There's none Generally, there's some and in some cases. There's a lot so Chances are you will get at least some benefit from this down river swim sunrise to the rear so It's it's a little bit less of an issue as opposed to some other races Obviously on this point-to-point swim if you were swimming To to the east right into that sunrise. It would be a much bigger Deal, but the fact that you are actually swimming largely to the west That that sunrise is going to be less of an issue if it as opposed to to other other directions
A couple of tips for the swim course. The current is going to be strongest towards the center. Now, the buoys are generally lined up towards what will be the left side of the shore to the south, but the current will be stronger, again, towards the center of the river. So if you can kind of cheat over to that side, basically you're just going to have to be working with the support personnel. So there'll be folks out there on paddle boards, kayaks, boats, all that kind of stuff. They're going to be keeping you from going too far, but my recommendation here would be to kind of push the limits here and favor that right-hand side as much as is safe, as much as is allowed, just simply because the current will be stronger out there in the middle. So relatively soon, the first couple of hundred yards in, you'll begin to kind of make that turn there.
uh to to the right and then you'll be able to sight off of the island so it's it's a uh it's it's it's low enough large enough that it actually is a great sighting object so it's going to make um swimming uh this this course uh quite easy in fact um keep in mind in in these races you only have to actually swim around the red buoys um so basically you're just going uh from the start to that red buoy so um having that straighter line towards the island can actually um keep it a little shorter uh than if you were to go buoy to buoy to buoy you may end up actually even exceeding that 2.4 miles so uh kind of cut off uh just like on the run we say run the tangents uh in this case you may want to swim the tangents as as well so it's going to be the shortest path to the exit um and it's going to provide the the strongest current so again uh want to respect the support personnel uh stay within the limits of where they're
keeping you. But basically, the shortest, fastest route is going to be towards the center of the river. Find your space. It's a nice wide river. No need here to get bunched up with a bunch of athletes that you're going to have a whole bunch of contact with. If you are one that is proficient in swimming with others and pacing and drafting, fantastic. Even then, you can still find your space. There's plenty of room to spread out. Fortunately, this is great in that it's not one of these washing machines where you're constantly making contact and hitting other swimmers for 2.4 miles. You can definitely find some clear space. The way the time trial start is, not tons of people all starting at the same time. Not to say there won't be some contact, but it won't be a constant. Then make sure to start moving towards the red buoy early, especially if the...
current is strong. The stronger the current, the more important and the earlier you're going to want to move towards that red buoy. So, if you've been swimming out there in the middle of the river where that current is strong, keep in mind there is a bit of a 90 degree turn, not quite 90 degrees, but it's a pretty sharp turn that you're going to be swimming towards that swim exit. At that point, you are now going to be swimming across that current that has been pushing you. So, it may be a little difficult to actually exit the swim, depending on how strong that current is. Obviously, there will be more people out there. They're not going to let you get swept off into the next state or anything like that. But again, just be aware of that and start swimming towards that red buoy early on, just knowing that you will have to cross over the current. Alright, so as you complete that Smokin' Fast Awesome Swim, basically that red turn buoy...
will be just off of this dock here. You'll go around, make that left turn, head towards the ladder. So you can see the stairs there, kind of at the end of that floating platform. That is actually where the volunteers will be waiting to assist you out of the water, up the stairs, and from there, you will head out onto transition. Now this picture here was taken during the run course, so you can see that actually later in the day, this is the very beginning of the run course, but this is actually the exit for the swim as well. So you'll come under those bridges, come to the red buoy, 90 degree turn to the left, exit up those stairs, right-hand turn, and actually run in the opposite direction that these athletes are running. From there, you will head under this structure, and then make a left turn onto that sidewalk, and then up that ramp. Just for reference, that...
glass triangle in the background. That is the aquarium. So the exit is right there by the aquarium. So come out of the water under the overpass, left hand turn up the ramp and into the transition area. So in the transition area T1, you will grab your bike gear bag. That bag will be dropped off the day before. From there, you'll head into the change tent where you will transition, do whatever it is that you need to do. You will repack your bike gear bag with your swim gear, proceed out to the bike racks and then head out onto the mount line. So a couple of tips for T1, know your location. So this is going to be both your bike and your bags. So the day before the race, you're going to be dropping those bags off. They are put in numerical.
There are signs that are placed every hundred bags or so just to provide some context. But there are going to be thousands of other bags that look exactly like yours. So this is, I would say, one of my top tips here. Do something to your bag to make it identifiable. So my recommendation is duct tape. I have given this advice to thousands of athletes. I've seen it used in every race. Never been a problem. So get some brightly colored duct tape or some novelty duct tape. Walmart, Walgreens, wherever has all sorts. And just tear off about a 12-inch strip and post those all over your bag. So as you are coming out of the swim, it'll catch your eye. You'll see it. You'll know exactly where it is. So you're not going to be hunting around for it. Because even though you may be dropping your bag in exactly the right spot the day before the race, inevitably other athletes, volunteers, those bags do get moved. So we don't want to waste a bunch of time.
having to find your bag. So doing something like that to make it identifiable, stand out is gonna be beneficial. The other thing is to write your number all over your bag. So you are going to be given decals at check-in that you are going to stick on those bags. There's a little box on the back that says a fixed sticker here or something like that. That sticker is the only thing that is going to differentiate your bag from thousands of others that look exactly like it. If your bag, if that sticker comes off, which I have seen numerous times happen, now there is nothing that is going to distinguish your bag from thousands of others exactly like it. So recommendation is to, before you put that sticker, write your number in that box. And then I say go wild and write it all over, just why not? Because now you'll know exactly whose bag that is and it'll catch your eye. But these are gonna be sitting out overnight, exposed to the humidity, potentially exposed to rain. So I have seen.
these decals come off. So write your number all over the bag, post some duct tape on it so it catches your eye and you'll be able to move through here quickly. So know where your bag is, know where your bike is, because there's a lot of both and you can end up wasting some time if you're out there hunting for bike or bag. Be efficient and pack minimally. So these are kind of one in the same. You are limited to what you can fit in that gear bag. So the one thing you absolutely have to pack in your bike gear bag is a helmet because you have to have a helmet and it cannot be out there on your bike. So that helmet is going to take up a decent amount of space in your bag. So be efficient, pack minimally, and then practice your transition in advance. Know exactly what it is that you're going to do in what order. That is going to help ensure that you don't forget anything. So the better rehearsed you are.
The the quicker you're gonna get in and out of transition and the lower the risk of doing something wrong for getting something Anything like that and then consider a go bottle. This is another one of my favorite tips. This was something that Was given to me by by my friends at precision fuel and hydration and I started using this several years ago And it's it's it's a winner So I mentioned earlier I use Vitamin water for from my my hydration in the days leading into the race and the reason I like the to save those bottles is they have a very large mouth on it So you can drink from them quite quickly. So this go bottle is a bottle that I will put about in t1 6 to 8 ounces of water and then I will do a serving of electrolytes a serving of nutrition So and then I'll just drink that quite quickly there in the change tent and ditch that ditch that that bottle So it's been however long since I took my last
a bit of hydration or nutrition there at the park before starting that swim. I didn't take in any nutrition over the past hour to two hours, give or take. So now this is just going to help jumpstart everything back. So it's, it's giving me some hydration, some calories, some electrolytes. And then once I get out onto the bike course, then I can start my, my normal bike hydration and nutrition protocols. But that go bottle it's just a little booze, little jumpstart there in transition. So I found that works quite well for me. So consider adding that go bottle to your transition. All right, time to head out onto the bike course. Another subject of a lot of conversation and a lot of lore. It is a beautiful course. It is a fun course. It is a fair course, but, but it has, has a little bit out there certainly to, to challenge you. So generally the roads are good.
The worst roads are right at the very beginning. So Something just to kind of be aware of as you come out of transition There there are some some areas to be aware of but generally once you get out of that immediate vicinity the roads Will will improve there are several railroad track crossings. So again something else just to be aware of typically Ironman will cover those if they're able to with a carpet or something like that that Lessens the impact of going over those railroad tracks, but just be aware of things like bottles coming loose and obviously want to be careful Not to crash coming across those The course is a net uphill out as you're headed southbound And then of course in that downhill as you head back to the north So the good news is as you're headed back into transition It is a net downhill It is relatively flat Through Tennessee. So the first several miles of this course you're headed south Chattanooga is
basically on the Tennessee Georgia border so it's pretty flat as you are leaving Chattanooga and then the couple miles that you're still in Tennessee and then The the elevation the undulation the hills all that really begin once you cross over Into to Georgia. So there are several short climbs that you need to be aware of primarily there are two Main areas where we're going to see the the largest amount of Elevation. So I kind of broke the the course here in into into to the image on the left those first 10 miles That's what I mentioned is More so the the flatter section and then once you cross over start the loop You can see just below that 10 mile mark is is the top The top of the loop so you're starting that loop around mile 11 or so But you will then do twice so the rollers really kind of again
mile 10 they were I would say the the most elevation change is between miles 20 and mile 30 and then that's going to be approximately 70 to 80 65 to 75 or so on the on the second loops obviously the the same elevation for the second loop and then the two largest is is one I mentioned earlier the one that you should definitely go check out and see before the race is right there down there at the at the bottom of the the u-turn so it's it's approximately mile 32 something like that on the first loop that is where you're gonna be headed downhill and then make a sharp almost u-turn back to your left and you're now gonna be headed back up to the north that is a steep climb it's not real long but it is relatively steep especially after coming out of that u-turn so make sure that you are aware of that
And then the other extended climb is towards the end of the loop. So there's this southbound section that on the first loop is approximately a mile, we'll call it 11 to 30, and then you're northbound back up to about mile 55. And then you have a little bit of a westbound as you finish off. That goes from Chickamauga back to the start of the loop. There is a section of climb along there. So you can kind of see there are two predominant peaks on the elevation chart down here at the bottom. That's where those are. So basically the end of the southbound side of the loop, and then the westbound side as you're completing the loop. So be aware of those. And again, as you go down there and check out the course, just go see exactly what those look like and know exactly what you're going to be in store for come race day. All right, so a couple of tips for the bike course.
Uh, be careful out of T1, uh, as mentioned, um, the roads there, uh, aren't, uh, great. There are some cracks that can cause some problems. There may also be some traffic, uh, both from other cyclists and potentially even, um, cars. It's not a completely closed course. Um, so just be careful as you're exiting T1, uh, from there, settle in through town and start your nutrition, hydration, and cooling protocols. Um, as mentioned, it is absolutely critical that you, um, maintain those, you stay up on that. And it's just a great opportunity as you are, uh, kind of winding through the first couple of miles, getting out there onto what I would really refer to as, as the course. Um, that's really what you're doing for about the first, um, five miles or so, which is kind of getting out of town. There are several turns, 90 degree turns that, uh, some of the roads are even short, you know, it may just be like one block, um, between 90 degree turns. So you're not going to be getting up a lot of speed or anything like that. Great opportunity just to, uh, start getting in, um, the water, the calories, the electrolytes and setting the precedent.
uh, for the day. As mentioned, the rollers are going to begin around the state line. Um, so the first couple of miles relatively flat, pretty easy, great opportunity to let the heart rate settle both from the swim and transition, uh, start focusing on your, your power output. What is your plan? What is your nutrition, hydration, electrolytes, all that. And then really start to ride once you cross the line and, uh, really start to have fun out there, um, on those rollers, avoid cross chaining. So this is going to be a little different for everyone based on your, uh, your cycling ability, as well as your, your setup. But what we want to do, um, is maintain a relatively straight chain. So a cross chain occurs when, uh, for example, you may be in your big ring, uh, and your, your largest, uh, gear on your cassette to where that chain is at a, at a pretty steep angle. It's going to make more noise. It's making more noise because it's creating more friction. So, um, we have there is referred to as drive train loss. You're actually losing power because of the position of that chain.
You're gonna be better off shifting to your small ring and then being more so in the middle of your cassette. So There may be times inevitably where you need to do that But just be aware since you're approaching some of these steeper climbs longer climbs You may want to shift from the big year to the big ring to the small ring Just that you can't avoid that that cross chain, especially down there at the U-turn That would be a point where Many athletes will need to go to their small ring to comfortably make it up That that climb there down there at the bottom again It's different for everyone based on your cycling abilities as well as your setup and all that. So Again, it's gonna vary for you As mentioned prior as well. It is it downhill to the U-turn and then sharp turn to uphill So as you are approaching that make sure that you are in the right gear and in the right ring So make sure that you're ready to take that climb back up again. Not all that long
But it is a challenging, even fun section of the course. Just be aware of it. So again, all the more reason to go out and see it prior to experiencing it for the first time as you make that first loop. It is a net downhill from that U-turn down to Chickamauga. So it's 14 miles of net downhill. Now it's not necessarily going to even feel like it, but it is a net downhill. So a little bit easy, good opportunity for recovery. So it is a net zero course. So if it is a net downhill from the U-turn to Chickamauga, keep in mind, that means you are a net uphill on that first section. So just know that you're going to be doing a little bit of climbing, whether you perceive it or not. It is a net increase to that U-turn, but then you have a 14 mile stretch from the U-turn back to Chickamauga. That is, it is a net downhill. That doesn't mean you're going to be coasting for 14 miles or hitting 50 miles an hour or anything like that, but just be aware of that. So great news is that it's going to be late in the.
ride for the second loop. So a good opportunity just to kind of settle in and a good opportunity not to overcook it. So it's nice when you don't have a real challenging closing section of a bike course that's really going to take it out of you and really impact your run. So you're going to be doing your work a little bit earlier in the day. So that second U-turn is around mile 80. And I would say your hardest work is done by about mile 80. So effectively your next 34 miles or so. Sure, it's 34 miles to ride. There are going to be some hills in there, even as I mentioned, between after Chickamauga is that second climb, but it's not, it's not super difficult. It's not super long, but just a good opportunity to, to once again get caught up on hydration and nutrition and cooling. If, if that's something that you need to do, let the heart rate settle down and set yourself up for for a great run. So yeah, elevation peak is West of Chickamauga. So you'll make that 90 degree or not 90 degrees.
turn, but you'll make a left hand turn right there around mile 100 on the second loop. And that's where that other climb is. So basically at the bottom of the loop and then at the top of the loop is where really the most significant climbs are going to be. And then once you complete the loop, headed back into town, you've got somewhere around 12 miles or so to go, begin to prepare for T2 and the run. So my recommendation is to not take in any hydration or fuel in the last 20 minutes. So that goes a little bit against what I've been preaching all night about staying up on hydration and nutrition. But what we don't want to do is fill the belly up with a bunch of either food or water and have that to start the run, especially because there's a pretty significant climb right out of transition. You don't want a bunch of water or food sloshing around in your stomach early on.
in, on the run course. So 20 minutes out, generally for, for most that's, you know, that's somewhere in the neighborhood of six, seven miles, so about halfway back to maybe it's the state line is somewhere around there. You could use that as your reference. Once I hit back into Tennessee, stop taking in any nutrition hydration. So make sure prior to that, that you are caught up. So topped off somewhere in that last stretch, maybe it's getting up that last climb after Chickamauga and then knowing, Hey, I need to, you know, get in six, eight ounces of water. I need to get in a hundred calories, take a gel or something like that just to fuel the last section of the bike and then start the, start the run strong. The other thing is beginning to set up your run cadence. So the easiest way to do that is to match your run cadence to your bike cadence. So kind of the rule of thumb is a 90 steps per minute, a cadence of one 80. So start spinning at a cadence of 90 and you're
your brain will get used to that turnover rate, so that when you transition and start out on the run, your legs will automatically just head out there and continue that rate of 90 steps per minute, turning over at 90 times per minute. So just be aware of that. All right, as you head into T2, very similar procedure and very similar advice to T1. You will retrieve your run gear bag. You will head into that change tent and transition in there. You will repack your bike gear bag into your run bag. And then from there, you will head out onto the run course. Tips for T2. Again, pretty much exactly like the tips for T1. Be efficient, pack minimally, practice in advance, and consider a go bottle. So the only thing I do differently with my go bottle in T2 is...
is I will put more in it. So T1 is six, eight ounces so that I can drink it down quite quickly there, actually while I'm in transition because I don't want to take that bottle with me out onto the bike course, my cages and all that are taken with my other fueling. But on the run, I can very easily carry that bottle with me. So I'll put more like 10 to 12 ounces of water in there. And then I will either drink that all down while I am in transition, or I may take it with me and make it a true go bottle and just kind of nurse that over the first couple of hundred yards, maybe the first half mile, mile, whatever the case may be. It really is going to depend on my stomach and how it's feeling. If I'm in transition and my stomach is feeling great, I'll probably just go ahead and take the full 12 ounces. But if I'm a little off, my stomach's a little eh, I'm not quite ready to chug 12 ounces of water, I'll take it with me. And then again, just kind of nurse it and then just dispose of that bottle once I hit an aid station or something. Thank you.
like that. So again, uh, uh, what, what that's going to do is, is with that 20 minute break, um, your stomach has had the opportunity to empty. Um, so now, uh, it's going to be ready and taking on that 10 to 12 ounces should be fine for most people. Um, it's, it's not going to cause the sloshiness or, or, or a full feeling, anything like that. So you should be able to take that down, um, pretty easy and then absorb it quite quickly, uh, as well as you head out onto the run course. It is a two loop, uh, course. So, uh, kind of like the, the run, uh, you'll be doing this twice. Um, so it's, uh, same thing. And so it's a great opportunity to learn on the first and then, um, hit it harder on the second two loop course. Uh, it is rolling with some climbs. So, so kind of similar, uh, to, to the run course where it's, uh, there are some sections where it's pretty flat, but then there's some sections where it's, uh, uh, definitely, uh, going uphill and downhill. So, uh, again,
go check out the course before and see exactly what I'm referring to when I'm saying hilly or flat. It is a mix of sun and shade. So there are sections that you're going to be running along some streets that are not going to be shaded at all. So early on, on the loop, you're going to be fully exposed to the sun. But then as you run along the path or run back through the neighborhood, those areas are going to be more shaded. So kind of a mix of sun and shade throughout the course. Your personal needs bags are going to be at the start of a lap two. So you'll come across that quite popular, quite famous pedestrian bridge. That is going to be the final stretch of the loop. And then as you begin your second loop, that is where your personal needs bag will be. So around mile 13, you'll have access to that. So there are several climbs between.
four and 6% grade. So these are pretty legit, a four to 6% climb. Pretty good, that's gonna slow you down. You're gonna have to, you're gonna feel it. So there is, the first one is, as I mentioned, relatively soon, almost immediately out of transition. There's approximately a half mile climb at the start. So right out of the gate, you're headed uphill. The good news is that's gonna become a downhill as you are headed to the finish line 26.1 miles later. From there, it is gonna flatten out, as you can see, according to the elevation chart down there at the bottom. And usually when I'm doing these webinars, I don't put elevation charts on the run because they're just not significant enough. But this is an exception to that because we have a pretty good disparity between the flat sections and the hilly sections. So I wanted you guys to see that. So as you're headed out on the path, so on this side, you're on the south or east side of.
of the river for the first several miles. Again, pretty flat as you're headed out on the road, then you get over onto the path. All that is relatively flat, so nothing really to be aware of until very late in that first section out and back. You can see there at the bottom, just south of the island, just to the left of the 20-mile mark. At the end of the path, there's about a third of a mile that is a pretty good climb. So then you basically back up to street level, you'll hang a right onto the bridge, and then around the time you get over the island that you were sighting off of during the swim several hours earlier, the second half of that bridge is going to be uphill. So it's not what you may think of just like an arch where it kind of peaks in the middle. It actually is flatter on the first half, and then the elevation is gonna begin on the second, and then continue once you've completed the bridge. It's still gonna be going uphill.
a little bit from from there and then once you get off onto this loop that is on the the far side That the section where that mile 10 mark is This is actually going to be the hilliest section of the run course. We're looking at the elevation chart Where where you see those bumps that is going to be on that section over there The steepest is actually at the end of that that loop Kind of where that little runner icon is as you're completing that that neighborhood Loop that is where the the larger climb is going to be from there. You'll head back Towards the river hang a little bit of right there at mile 25 and then you'll cross over the pedestrian bridge So that's going to be either the end of the first loop or the end of your race, but there is one more climb to do there at the end of either the loop or end of your race, so Those are going to be the most significant so it's beginning into the path into the bridge into the bridge
the neighborhood and then the pedestrian bridge coming back across. So again, go out, look at them, see them. A lot of these climbs are in the same kind of vicinity. So they're really in the area of the start finish where you're going to be down there anyway. You're going to be checking out those bridges, chances are. And then the path as well, the significant climb is right there close to the bridge. So you don't even have to say have to go out all the way to the first U-turn point. That section is relatively flat. But the stuff you really want to see is kind of all somewhat in the same vicinity. And so a great little loop to run as you're preparing in the days prior to the race is just run the two bridges. Go across and then make a turn, head back on the other bridge, and you'll get to experience a decent chunk of what you're going to experience on race day. And then as mentioned, as you come across
that pedestrian bridge for the second time, what was a pretty difficult climb at the very beginning, now is going to be, it may even be difficult descent. It is pretty steep, it is relatively long. You'll probably feel it in your quads and in your knees, but I would say it's better to have that fast downhill than a climb back up to the finish line. So a couple of tips for the run course, negative split per loop. So I'm a big advocate of breaking courses down into sections. They become more manageable. You can manage your pace, your nutrition, your hydration, all those things if you approach it in that way. So look to negative split. And I would say here, it may not be a pace negative split simply because the latter half is more difficult. As we kind of mentioned, the first half of the loop is relatively flat. So it's going to be easier to run faster on that section. The second half of the loop is.
is where the elevation gain is. So you're naturally going to be slower through there. So instead of negative splitting the pace, negative split your energy or your effort level, even your grade-adjusted pace, if that's a metric that you use. So basically, what we want to do here is build throughout, start conservative. Chances are, by the time you're running, it's going to be quite warm in the afternoon. So start off easy, and then build throughout. And I think that's a critical thing that we see. You may be feeling great off the bike. You make that first little climb, and then you've got a relatively flat for the next several miles, and you may just feel like running super fast. Just know that you've, one, got a long way to go, and two, the more difficult section of the course is waiting for you. So take it easy. And then on the second loop, if you're feeling fantastic and you feel like, I can beast those hills at mile 24, then go for it. But start off conservative.
and then build throughout. And then for the last time, I will remind you, stay hydrated and stay cool. So very good chance that it is going to be warm to hot, very good chance it's gonna be humid. It's a pretty good chance it's gonna be sunny, simply because in the past, that is what we have seen on race day. So even if it's only a forecasted high of like 85, if it's humid and sunny, that is still gonna be plenty warm for you. And again, at this point, you've been exercising and generating body heat for eight, 10, 12 hours, it's gonna be hot. So it is critical that you stay hydrated and you stay cool. What we're gonna see inevitably are several athletes out there on the course who are walking. And I would argue they are not out there walking because they do not have the fitness to run that marathon. It's been an execution issue and chances are they are overheated and they are.
dehydrated. So that is why they are not able to live to live up to the potential that they earned. They earned a certain amount of potential throughout their training. And oftentimes what we see is athletes don't realize that because of poor execution. And that's primarily in the they maybe went out too hard. So it was a pacing issue. They didn't drink enough. So they're dehydrated. And they didn't manage their core temperature. So they're they're now overheated. And really all three of those are very difficult to come back from. And oftentimes athletes will will be guilty of all three. They went out too hard. They didn't drink and they got hot. But yeah, to recover from that definitely takes time. And oftentimes athletes never will recover from it. And inevitably, they will spend much more time out there on that run course than they should have. So hear me hear me well, drink like it's your job because it is taken plenty of water, plenty of electrolytes, and then
stay cool, ice at the aid stations, cold water, every opportunity that you get, do everything that you can to manage your core temperature and stay hydrated. Part of that is take something from every aid station. So you paid a bunch of money to be part of this race. You might as well take advantage of the stuff that they're giving away. So that, and really you probably need something at every aid station. So every, they're every mile, give or take. So maybe it's hydration, maybe it's calories, maybe it's electrolytes, maybe it's a gel, something like that. Or maybe it's just some cold water to pour over your head. Maybe it's some ice to dump down your shorts. Take something from every aid station and then plan your aid stations in advance. You're gonna see them likely several hundred yards away. Start thinking about what am I due for? Am I due for water, calories, anything like that? Am I getting hot? What do I need to do at this aid station? So plan in advance as you're coming up. Don't arrive at the aid station and say, yeah, maybe I want a pretzel.
or maybe use some Gatorade, plan it out in advance and be more strategic as you are approaching those aid stations. Then, just a good reminder for technique. As you are approaching those climbs, drive your knees. That is where your ability to climb and run fast, which are effectively the same thing, is gonna come from your knee drive. So make sure that you're getting good knee drive as you are running up those hills, and then recover on the downhills. Also be careful about burning up your quads. That is one of the risks of running downhill is we can have a tendency there both to have a lot of more impact on our knees and impact on the quads. So just kind of be careful with that. And then fuel on the flats. So plenty of opportunities here to really make sure that you're staying up on your protocols, and those are gonna be easier to do on the flats. You're likely gonna have a lower heart rate, and then just kind of.
Technically or logistically, it's easier while running on the flats. All right, the finish line. This is what you have been working for, dreaming about blood, sweat, tears, financial investment, time investment, time away from family and friends. This is what it is all about. So a couple of tips as you approach that glorious finish line, you will come across that pedestrian bridge, which is going to be full of energy, full of spectator support. You'll hang a turn and then run downhill towards that finish line. Start thinking about it. First thing to do is clean up. You're going to be a mess, blood, sweat, tears, and snot and all that. This is where you're going to be taking pictures. It'll be your Instagram profile for the next several years. Main thing here, I would say one of my top tips, take it in. This is what you are going to remember. This is what is going to bring you back. This is what makes all that investment worth it. Take it in.
So, I would say, especially once you enter that chute, once you step onto that red carpet, really be present and make yourself, because you're going to be very tired. There's a lot going on, but make sure to collect yourself and be present as you are approaching that finish line. Listen for your name to be called, and then plan your finish. What does your finish line look like? It's a little different for everyone. Just make sure you're not taking anything with you, any kids, any pets, anything like that, but really enjoy it. Make it yours, make it unique, and find some space. If you're running there and there's a bunch of people, maybe just hang back a little bit and let them go, let them have their time, and then really enjoy it. Now, if you've ran the last 24 miles and made a new friend, absolutely cross the finish line with them, but find the space and make a picture fantastic for the finish line.
And then for me, it's all high-fives. I love running down that shoot. I love high-fiving the kids the strangers my support crew But again, whatever it is that that's gonna make this finish line special and memorable for you by all means do that and a rocket and Make it make it awesome All right now here's where I would normally answer all the questions that I have have gotten Unfortunately, I have already exceeded my time. Sorry, not sorry I love talking about this this race and everything So what I will do is if you have submitted a question Throughout the webinar here this evening. I will respond to those via email in the next couple days If you have a question, feel free to to reach out to me. My email address is John at tribe triathlon net I'm going to be sending out a replay of this Tomorrow, so you'll have my email address there. Feel free to respond. Let me know how I can help Let me know if you have any questions. If you if you need clarification on anything. I'm more than happy
uh, to, to assist. So, uh, thank you for joining me here. Um, this evening, I hope this has been beneficial. I hope you've gotten some good things. I hope this helps you reduce your stress and increase your confidence so that you can have an amazing experience at Ironman Chattanooga. Go be an Ironman.